# Project setup and git workflow

## Setup Development Environment

* install git
* clone this repository
* open the rstudio project
* install dependencies with `renv::restore()`

### Project Setup Troubleshooting

If you're not using Rstudio: start R with the root folder of the project as
working directory. renv should be loaded automatically and you should see a
message like `Project '...' loaded. [renv 1.1.5]` and you should be able to use
`renv::restore()`. If renv is not automatically loaded use
`source("renv/activate.R")` to load it.

## Project Structure

Reusable functions, methods, etc. will be available as an r-package (built from
this repository), that can be tested, built, installed, and distributed. Bespoke
code for the simulation study will be included in the directory `scripts`.

## Contribute Code / git workflow

To contribute code:

1. switch to the main branch `git checkout main`
2. make sure you are on the latest version of the main branch `git pull main`
3. create a new branch from there `git checkout -b <new_branch_name>` (replace
   <new_branch_name> with the name of your branch)
4. write your code
5. Run `renv::status(dev=TRUE)` to check if any pacakges need to be installed,
   updated or added to renv. If necessary use `renv::snapshot(dev=TRUE)` to add
   packages you installed to renv or `renv::restore` if you are missing pacakges
   others have added.
6. run `devtools::document()` to generate documentation and update `DESCRIPTION`
   and `NAMESPACE`
7. run `devtools::test()` and `devtools::check()`, if there are any errors or
   warnings, fix them and iterate from step 5. if all errors are taken care of
   continue to 8. To skip long running tests set the respective env variable
   using: `devtools::check(env_vars = c("_R_CHECK_DONTTEST_EXAMPLES_"="FALSE"))`
8. commit your code to git through the Rstudio userinterface or with `git add .` 
   followed by `git commit -m "<one-line description of the changes>"`
9. push your code to github with `git push -u origin <new_branch_name>` for the
   first time and just `git push` afterwards
10. Merging your code to the main branch:
   * Get the newest version of the main branch with `git checkout main` and 
     `git pull`
   * Merge main into your branch `git checkout <your branch>` and 
     `git merge main`. If you get any merge conflicts resolve them by editing
     the respective files and then committing.  
     If you get a merge conflict in any of the files generated by roxygen 
     (`NAMESPACE` or any of the `.Rd` files). Resolve any other conflicts and
     then update the files with `devtools::document()`. Rd files are updated
     automatically, `NAMESPACE` has to be deleted before.
   * Push your local changes to github `git push`
   * Open a pull-request on github
   * Wait for the github-actions checks to pass. The following actions should 
     run without errors or warnings:
      * R-CMD-check.yaml / macos-latest (release)
      * R-CMD-check.yaml / ubuntu-latest (devel)
      * R-CMD-check.yaml / ubuntu-latest (release)
      * R-CMD-check.yaml / windows-latest (release)
   * If relevant wait for review by colleagues
   * If you have to do corrections, leave the pull-request open, make the 
     changes in your feature branch and push them to the feature branch. All
     checks should automatically be run again. You can check this by viewing the
     pull-request on github.
   * If all works out, merge the pull request to main. If all work on the 
     feature branch is done, delete the feature branch after merging.

# Package Structure

Short checklist:

* Proposed naming convention:
  * data generation
    * `xxx_scenario` for the function that generates the scenario parameter values
    * `xxx_scenario_set_yyy` for the functions that calculate additional quantities from the scenario parameter values
    * `generate_xxx` for the data-generation function
  * anaylsis functions
    * `analyse_xxx_zzz` for the analysis method zzz in the xxx scenario
* Roxygen Documentation
  * document all function arguments
  * document all return values
  * document all related data-generation function in one help page
  * add one example-block per help page
  * wrap long-running examples in `\donttest{}`
   
## Style Guide

Please approximately keep to the 
[tidyverse style guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/) to keep the code easily
readable.

## Roxygen documentation

### General

Documentation and package metadata are automatically generated with the
`roxygen2` package. To get started with roxygen, have a look at this
[vignette](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/articles/roxygen2.html)
In r-studio you can add empty roxygen tags with `Code > Insert Roxygen Skeleton`.

### Function Documentation

Each documentation block starts with the title of the manual page. The most
important part of documentation are arguments and return values of functions.
They are documented with the `@param` and the `@returns` tags. Those should be
present for all functions.

To document multiple functions in one manual page use the `@describeIn` tag
followed by the name of the function where the documnetation should be added and
by the title to be used there. When documenting multiple functions in one page,
make sure to mention which function the description refers to. For example for
the return value. See
[generate_minimal_example.R](https://github.com/CI-RCT-Sim/CI.RCT.Sim/blob/main/R/generate_minimal_example.R)
for an example.

### Examples

Please also add examples to your function. When adding examples, please ensure
that they run without error, since examples are checked when building the
package.

Examples for data generation could be generating a list of parameters and
calculating additional quantities and then generating one dataset from one of
the lines of the parameter values. Here one example using all related functions
will be sufficient in most cases.

For analysis functions you can use the same
example but add two lines to analyse the dataset. See
[analyse_minimal_example.R](https://github.com/CI-RCT-Sim/CI.RCT.Sim/blob/vaccine_analysis_functions/R/analyse_minimal_example.R)
for an example.

Wrap examples that take a long time to run (e.g. requiring simulations or
bootstrapping) in a `\donttest{}` block. So they are not tested each time when
`devtools::check` is run.

### Imports, Dependencies

When using functions from other packages access them by `package::function` or
insert an `@importFrom <package> <function1> <function2> ...` tag. See
[utility_functions.R](https://github.com/CI-RCT-Sim/CI.RCT.Sim/blob/vaccine_analysis_functions/R/utility_funtions.R)
for an example.

If dependencies are not added to DESCRIPTION by `devtools::document()` add them
manually in `Imports`.

## Tests

If you want to add automated tests to your code use `usethis::use_test` while
having the R-file you want to test open in Rstudio. A test script is created in
`tests/testthat`. Add the code you want to be run to test and check properties
of the output, warnings, errors, ... with the `expect_...` functions from the
`testthat` pacakge. If you need any other packages for testing, add them to
`Suggests` in the `DESCRIPTION` file.

## Package Dependencies

If dependencies are not automatically added to DESCRIPTION from roxygen tags by
running `devtools::document()`, please add them manually. The most appropriate
field will most often be `Imports`.

